prāgevācāryaputrāhṛtiniśamanayā svīyaṣaṭsūnuvīkṣāṃ
kāṅkṣantyā māturuktyā sutalabhuvi baliṃ prāpya tenārcitastvam |
dhātu: śāpāddhiraṇyānvitakaśipubhavān śaurijān kaṃsabhagnā-
nānīyainān pradarśya svapadamanayathā: pūrvaputrān marīce: ||1||
prāk-eva-	long back only
ācārya-putra-āhṛti-	(thy) teacher's son bringing back
niśamanayā	hearing about
svīya-ṣaṭ-sūnu-	(her) own six sons
vīkṣāṃ kāṃkṣantyā	to see desiring
mātu:-uktyā	at (Thy) mother's words
sutala-bhuvi baliṃ prāpya	in the Sutala land going to Mahaabali
tena-arcita:-tvam	by him were honoured Thou
dhātu: śāpāt-	by Brahmaa's curse
hiraṇyānvitakaśipu	of Hiranyakashipu born
bhavān śaurijān	Thou (them) born of Vasudeva
kaṃsa-bhagnān-	by Kansa killed
ānīya-enān pradarśya	bringing them and showing them
svapadam-anayathā:	to Thy abode took (them)
pūrva-putrān-marīce:	(who were) formerly the sons of Marichi
Thy mother had long back heard of Thy having brought back Thy teacher Saandipini's son and she desired of Thee to be shown her six dead sons. By Thy mother's words Thou went to the Sutala land and met Mahaabali and were greatly honoured by him. From there Thou brought back the six sons who were originally Marichi's sons and were later born to Hiranyakashipu by a curse of Brahmaa. They later took birth as Vasudeva and Devaki's sons, who were killed by Kansa. Thou took them to Thy abode.
śrutadeva iti śrutaṃ dvijendraṃ
bahulāśvaṃ nṛpatiṃ ca bhaktipūrṇam |
yugapattvamanugrahītukāmo
mithilāṃ prāpithaṃ tāpasai: sameta: ||2||
śrutadeva	Shrutadeva
iti śrutaṃ	thus well known
dvijendram	the great Braahmina
bahulāśvam	(and) Bahulaashwa
nṛpatiṃ ca bhaktipūrṇam	the king and full of devotion
yugapat-	at the same time
tvam-anugrahītu-kāma:	Thou, to bless, desiring
mithilāṃ prāpitha	to Mithilaa went
tāpasai: sameta:	ascetics with
With the desire to bless both the great well known Braahmina Shrutadeva and the deeply devoted king Bahulaashwa, Thou went to Mithilaa along with many ascetics.
gacchan dvimūrtirubhayoryugapanniketa-
mekena bhūrivibhavairvihitopacāra: |
anyena taddinabhṛtaiśca phalaudanādyai-
stulyaṃ praseditha dadatha ca muktimābhyām ||3||
gacchan-dvimūrti:-	going in two (similar) forms
ubhayo:-yugapat-	to both at the same time
niketam-	the houses
ekena bhūrivibhavai:-	by one with plenty of rich offerings
vihita-upacāra:	performed (Thy) worship
anyena	by the other
tat-dina-bhṛtai:-ca	and with that day's alms
phala-odana-ādyai:-	fruits rice and others
tulyaṃ praseditha	equally pleased
dadātha ca	and gave
muktim-ābhyam	liberation to both
Thou went to the house of both of them at the same time by assuming two identical forms. One, the king received and worshipped Thee with plenty of rich offerings. While the other, the Braahmina worshipped Thee and offered to Thee the fruits and rice and other things obtained as alms that day. Thou were equally pleased with both of them and bestowed Mukti (liberation) on them.
bhūyo'tha dvāravatyāṃ dvijatanayamṛtiṃ tatpralāpānapi tvam
ko vā daivaṃ nirundhyāditi kila kathayan viśvavoḍhāpyasoḍhā: |
jiṣṇorgarvaṃ vinetuṃ tvayi manujadhiyā kuṇṭhitāṃ cāsya buddhiṃ
tattvārūḍhāṃ vidhātuṃ paramatamapadaprekṣaṇeneti manye ||4||
bhūya:-atha dvāravatyāṃ	again then in Dwaarikaa
dvija-tanaya-mṛtim	the Braahmin's son's death
tat-pralāpān-api tvam	his lamentation also Thou
ko vā daivaṃ nirundhyāt-	who indeed can resist fate
iti kila kathayan	indeed saying
viśva-voḍhā-api-	the whole world's support even
asoḍhā:	did not support
jiṣṇo:-garvam	Arjuna's pride
vinetumtvayi	to take away, in Thee
manuja-dhiyā	of a mere human being thinking
kuṇṭhitāṃ ca-asya buddhim	and (his) blunted intellect
tattva-ārūḍhāṃ vidhātuṃ	to the Truth's higher level to bring
paramatama-pada-prekṣaṇena-	the Supreme abode by showing
iti manye	thus I believe
Again then in Dwaarikaa, there was a Braahmin whose children died just when they were born. To the wails and lamentations of the father Thou had just to say that who could resist fate. May be, I believe, seeing this Arjuna's mind was blunted into thinking that Thou were merely a human being. To curb his pride and to take him to the high level of realizing the Truth, Thou showed him the Supreme abode, Vaikuntha.
naṣṭā aṣṭāsya putrā: punarapi tava tūpekṣayā kaṣṭavāda:
spaṣṭo jāto janānāmatha tadavasare dvārakāmāpa pārtha: |
maitryā tatroṣito'sau navamasutamṛtau vipravaryaprarodaṃ
śrutvā cakre pratijñāmanupahṛtasuta: sannivekṣye kṛśānum ||5||
naṣṭā:-aṣṭa-asya putrā:	are dead eight of his sons
puna:-api tava tu-	again also Thy indeed
upekṣayā kaṣṭavāda:	indifference (because of which) disrepute
spaṣṭa: jāta:	clear it was made
janānām-atha	of the public (in general)then
tat-avasare	at that time
dvārakām-āpa pārtha:	to Dwaarikaa reached Arjuna
maitryā tatra-	due to friendship there (in Dwaarikaa)
uṣita:-asau	staying he
navama-suta-mṛtau	the ninth son having died
vipravarya-prarodaṃ	the great Braahmina's crying
śrutvā cakre pratijñām-	hearing, made a promise
anupahṛta-suta:	(in case of) not bringing back the son
sannivekṣye kṛśānum	(he) would enter fire
People began to speak ill of Thee at Thy indifference towards the Braahmina even after he had lost eight sons. At that time Arjuna came and stayed at Dwaarikaa on a friendly visit. When he heard the wailing and lamentations of the Braahminaa on having lost his ninth son, he was very much moved. He vowed to bring back the son failing which he would immolate himself in fire.
mānī sa tvāmapṛṣṭvā dvijanilayagato bāṇajālairmahāstrai
rundhāna: sūtigehaṃ punarapi sahasā dṛṣṭanaṣṭe kumāre |
yāmyāmaindrīṃ tathā'nyā: suravaranagarīrvidyayā''sādya sadyo
moghodyoga: patiṣyan hutabhuji bhavatā sasmitaṃ vārito'bhūt ||6||
mānī sa tvām-apṛṣṭvā	proud he, without asking Thee
dvija-nilaya-gata:	to the Braahmina's house went
bāṇa-jālai:-mahā-astrai:	with arrows and divine missiles
rundhāna: sūtigehaṃ	blocked the labour room
puna:-api sahasā	again also suddenly
dṛṣṭa-naṣṭe kumāre	vanished the child
yāmyām-aindrīm	Yama's abode, Indra's abode
tathā-anyā:	and others'
suravara-nagarī:-	gods' houses
vidyayā-āsādya	by Yogic powers reaching
sadya: mogha-udyoga:	immediately, (his) fruitless efforts
patiṣyan hutabhuji	about to fall in fire
bhavatā sasmitam	by Thee smilingly
vārita:-abhūt	prevented was
When the tenth child was to be born, the proud Arjun went to the Braahmin's house without telling Thee. He made a protective web with his arrows and divine missiles around the labour room. Again suddenly the child's body disappeared. Immediately Arjun with his yogic powers went in search for the infant to the houses of Yama , Indra and other gods. As all his efforts were in vain he was about to enter the fire when Thou smilingly prevented him from doing so.
sārdhaṃ tena pratīcīṃ diśamatijavinā syandanenābhiyāto
lokālokaṃ vyatītastimirabharamatho cakradhāmnā nirundhan |
cakrāṃśukliṣṭadṛṣṭiṃ sthitamatha vijayaṃ paśya paśyeti vārāṃ
pāre tvaṃ prādadarśa: kimapi hi tamasāṃ dūradūraṃ padaṃ te ||7||
sārdhaṃ tena	with him
pratīcīṃ diśam-	to the westward direction
ati-javinā syandanena-	by a very fast chariot
abhiyāta:	going
lokālokaṃ vyatīta:-	(the mountain of ) Lokaaloka crossing
timirabharam-atha	the darkness intense, then
cakradhāmnā nirundhan	by the splendorous discus expelling
cakra-aṃśu-kliṣṭa-dṛṣṭim	the discus rays dazzling the vision
sthitam-atha vijayaṃ	standing then Arjun
paśya paśya-iti	Look look' thus
vārāṃ pāre	the waters' beyond
tvaṃ prādadarśa:	Thou showed
kimapi hi	indescribable indeed
tamasāṃ dūra dūraṃ	of the Tamas Guna beyond
padaṃ te	abode of Thee
Thou rode with Arjun on a very fast chariot and went past the mountain Lokaaloka towards the west. The intense darkness there, Thou removed by the splendor of the Sudarshana discus. Arjuna's eyes were dazzled as he stood there. Thou showed him Thy indescribable abode beyond the causal waters which was unaffected by the darkness of ignorance or the Tamas Guna.
tatrāsīnaṃ bhujaṅgādhipaśayanatale divyabhūṣāyudhādyai-
rāvītaṃ pītacelaṃ pratinavajaladaśyāmalaṃ śrīmadaṅgam |
mūrtīnāmīśitāraṃ paramiha tisṛṇāmekamarthaṃ śrutīnāṃ
tvāmeva tvaṃ parātman priyasakhasahito nemitha kṣemarūpam ||8||
tatra-āsīnam	there sitting
bhujaṅga-adhipa-śayana-tale	(on) the serpent king (as) bed' surface
divya-bhūṣā-āyudha-ādyai:-	with divine attire ,weapons etc
āvītaṃ pītacelaṃ	adorned and with a yellow (silk) garment
pratinava-jalada-śyāmalaṃ	fresh rain clouds like blue
śrīmadaṅgam	adorned by (the presence of) Laxmi
(tisṛṇām) mūrtinām-	(of the Trinity) personified
īśitāraṃ param-	Ruler Supreme
iha tisṛṇām-	here (in this universe) of the Trinity
ekam-artham-śrutīnāṃ	the sole subject of the Vedas
tvām-eva tvaṃ	to Thyself only Thou
paramātman	O Supreme Being!
priya-sakha-sahita:	dear friend along with
nemitha kṣemarūpam	prostrated to Moksha personified
There seated was He on the bed constituted of the king serpent Aadishesha. He was adorned with ornaments and divine weapons and yellow silk garment. Goddess Laxmi was at his side and His form had the splendour of dark fresh rain bearing clouds. He is the Supreme Ruler over the Trinity of Brahmaa Vishnu and Mahesh and is the sole subject of all the Vedas and scriptures. To That Being, the embodiment of Moksha and identical to Thyself, Thou and Thy dear friend Arjun prostrated.
yuvāṃ māmeva dvāvadhikavivṛtāntarhitatayā
vibhinnau sandraṣṭuṃ svayamahamahārṣaṃ dvijasutān |
nayetaṃ drāgetāniti khalu vitīrṇān punaramūn
dvijāyādāyādā: praṇutamahimā pāṇḍujanuṣā ||9||
yuvāṃ mām-eva dvau-	you two are Myself alone, in two forms
adhika-vivṛta-antarhitatayā	by well manifested and by obstructed (divinity)
vibhinau	are different
sandraṣṭuṃ	to see (meet)
svayam-aham-ahārṣaṃm	Myself I took away
dvija-sutān	the Braahmin's sons
nayetaṃ drāk-etān-iti	take them soon, thus
khalu vitīrṇān puna:-amūn	indeed given again then
dvijāya-ādāya-	for the Braahmina taking
adā:	gave (them to the Braahmina)
praṇuta-mahimā	was sung Thy glory
pāṇḍujanuṣā	by Arjun
The two of you are Myself alone. In one the divinity is potent and it is latent in the other, so you two seem different. To meet you I Myself took away the sons of the Braahmin. You may now take them away.' With such words the Supreme Lord gave away the children which Thou gave back to the Braahmina, while Arjun sang Thy glory.
evaṃ nānāvihārairjagadabhiramayan vṛṣṇivaṃśaṃ prapuṣṇa-
nnījāno yajñabhedairatulavihṛtibhi: prīṇayanneṇanetrā: |
bhūbhārakṣepadambhāt padakamalajuṣāṃ mokṣaṇāyāvatīrṇa:
pūrṇaṃ brahmaiva sākṣādyaduṣu manujatārūṣitastvaṃ vyalāsī: ||10||
evaṃ nānā-vihārai:-	in this manner, by various sportive activities
jagat-abhiramayan	the world delighting
vṛṣṇi-vaṃśaṃ prapuṣṇan-	the Vrishni clan nurturing
ījāna:-yajña-bhedai:-	performing sacrifices by different Yangyas
atula-vihṛtibhi:	by unparalleled sportive endearments
prīṇayan-eṇa-netrā:	pleasing the gazelle eyed (wives)
bhūbhāra-kṣepa-dambhāt	the earth's burden eliminating, in the pretext of
pada-kamala-juṣāṃ	Thy lotus feet devoted to
mokṣaṇāya-avatīrṇa:	to give (them) liberation, having incarnated
pūrṇaṃ brahma-eva	In finite Brahman Itself
sākṣāt-yaduṣu	in material form in the Yadu clan
manujatā-rūṣita:-	in a human veil
tvaṃ vyalāsī:	Thou shone
In this manner Thou delighted the world by various sportive activities nurtured the Vrishni clan and performed many sacrificial rites and Yagnyas. Thou pleased the gazelle eyed wives with unparalleled sportive endearments and on the pretext of unburdening the earth gave liberation to many dependents and devotees. Thou, the incarnate Infinite Brahman Itself appeared in a material form and shone through the veil of a human form amongst the Yaadavas.
prāyeṇa dvāravatyāmavṛtadayi tadā nāradastvadrasārdra-
stasmāllebhe kadācitkhalu sukṛtanidhistvatpitā tattvabodham |
bhaktānāmagrayāyī sa ca khalu matimānuddhavastvatta eva
prāpto vijñānasāraṃ sa kila janahitāyādhunā''ste badaryām ||11||
prāyeṇa dvāravatyām-	mostly in Dwaarika
avṛtat-ayi	stayed O Lord! Thou
tadā nārada:-	then Naarada
tvat-rasārdr:-	in Thy bliss immersed
tasmāt-lebhe	from him received
kadācit-khalu	once indeed
sukṛta-nidhi:-tvat-pitā	merits repository, Thy father
tattva-bodham	spiritual insight
bhaktānām-agrayāyī	of the devotees the foremost
sa ca khalu	and he indeed
matimān-uddhava:-	the wise Uddhava
tvatta eva	from Thee alone
prāpta: vijñāna sāraṃ	attained the essence of spiritual knowledge
sa kila jana-hitāya-	he indeed for peoples benefit
adhunā-āste badaryām	even now resides in Badrikaashram
O Lord! In those days Naarada who mostly stayed in Dwaarika was always engrossed in the bliss of Thy worship. Once Thy meritorious father attained insight and illumination from him who is the foremost among the devotees. The most distinguished among the intelligent, Uddhava attained enlightenment from instructions given by Thee directly. It is believed that he is still residing in Badrikaashrama for the benefit of the world.
so'yaṃ kṛṣṇāvatāro jayati tava vibho yatra sauhārdabhīti-
snehadveṣānurāgaprabhṛtibhiratulairaśramairyogabhedai: |
ārtiṃ tīrtvā samastāmamṛtapadamagussarvata: sarvalokā:
sa tvaṃ viśvārtiśāntyai pavanapurapate bhaktipūrtyai ca bhūyā: ||12||
sa-ayaṃ kṛṣṇa-avatāra:	that this, Krishna incarnation
jayati tava vibho	excels, of Thee, O Lord!
yatra sauhārda-bhīti-sneha-	where by friendship, fear, love
dveṣa-anurāga-prabhṛtibhi:-	hatred, attachment and other
atulai:-aśramai:-yoga-bhedai:	unique effortless (spiritual) union methods
ārtiṃ tīrtvā samastām-	sorrows overcoming all
amṛta-padam-agu:-	liberated state went to
sarvata: sarva-lokā:	everywhere all the people
sa tvaṃ viśva-ārti-śāntyai	that Thou, for the world's sorrows removal
pavanapurapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
bhakti-pūrtyai ca bhūyā:	and for the attainment of full devotion deign to be
O Infinite Lord! Thy exalted incarnation as Krishna shines in all its uniqueness where all people everywhere effortlessly overcome all sorrows and attained spiritual union with various means of friendship, fear, love, hatred, attachment and other unique methods. May Thou O Lord of Guruvaayur! for the removal of world's sorrows having incarnated also deign to endow full devotion.